# Overview of Performance Analysis Tools {#sec:secOverviewPerfTools}

In the previous chapter, we explored the features implemented in modern processors to aid performance analysis. However, if you were to start directly using those features, it would become very nuanced very quickly as it requires a lot of low-level programming to make use of them. Luckily, performance analysis tools take care of all the complexity that is required to effectively use these HW performance monitoring features. It makes profiling goes smoothly, still it's critical to have an intuition of how the tool obtains and interprets the data. That is why we discuss analysis tools after we discussed CPU performance monitoring features.

This chapter gives a quick overview of the most popular tools available on major platforms. The choice will vary depending on which OS and CPU you're using. Some of the tools are cross-platform but majority are not, so it is important to know what tools are available to you. Those profiling tools are usually developed and maintained by the HW vendors themselves because they are the ones who know how to properly use performance monitoring features available on their CPUs. Unfortunately, this creates a situation when you need to install a specialized tool depending on which CPU you are using if you need to do an advanced performance engineering work. 

After reading the chapter, take the time to practice using tools that you may eventually use. Familiarize yourself with the interface and workflow of those tools. Profile the application that you work with on a daily basis. Even if you don't find any actionable insights, you will be much better prepared when the actual need comes.
