## Instruction Set Architecture

The instruction set architecture (ISA) is the contract between the software and the hardware, which defines the rules of communication. Intel x86-64,[^1] Armv8-A and RISC-V are examples of current-day ISAs that are widely deployed. All of these are 64-bit architectures, i.e., all address computations use 64 bits. ISA developers and CPU architects typically ensure that software or firmware conforming to the specification will execute on any processor built using the specification. Widely deployed ISAs also typically ensure backward compatibility such that code written for the GenX version of a processor will continue to execute on GenX+i.

Most modern architectures can be classified as general-purpose register-based, load-store architectures, such as RISC-V and ARM where the operands are explicitly specified, and memory is accessed only using load and store instructions. The X86 ISA is a register-memory architecture, where operations can be performed on registers, as well as memory operands. In addition to providing the basic functions in an ISA such as load, store, control and scalar arithmetic operations using integers and floating-point, the widely deployed architectures continue to augment their ISAs to support new computing paradigms. These include enhanced vector processing instructions (e.g., Intel AVX2, AVX512, ARM SVE, RISC-V "V" vector extension) and matrix/tensor instructions (Intel AMX, ARM SME). Applications that extensively use these advanced instructions typically see large performance gains.

Modern CPUs support 32-bit and 64-bit precision for floating-point and integer arithmetic operations. With the fast-evolving fields of machine learning and AI, the industry has a renewed interest in alternative numeric formats to drive significant performance improvements. Research has shown that machine learning models perform just as well using fewer bits to represent variables, saving on both compute and memory bandwidth. As a result, majority of mainstream ISAs have recently added support for lower precision data types such as 8-bit and 16-bit integer and floating-point types (int8, fp8, fp16, bf16), in addition to the traditional 32-bit and 64-bit formats for arithmetic operations.

[^1]: In the book I often write x86 for shortness, but I assume x86-64, which is a 64-bit version of the x86 instruction set, first announced in 1999. Also, I use ARM to refer to the ISA, and Arm to refer to the company.
