## Why Care about Performance?

In addition to the slowing trend of hardware single-threaded performance growth, there are a couple of other business reasons to care about performance. During the PC era,[^3] the costs of slow software were paid by the users, as inefficient software was running on user computers. With the advent of SaaS (software as a service) and cloud computing, the costs of slow software are put back on the software providers, not their users. If you're a SaaS company like Meta or Netflix,[^4] it doesn't matter if you run your service on-premise hardware or you use public cloud, you pay for the electricity your servers consume. Inefficient software cuts right into your margins and market evaluation. According to Synergy Research Group,[^5] worldwide spending on cloud services topped $100 billion in 2020, and according to Gartner,[^6] it will surpass $675 billion in 2024.

For many years performance engineering was a nerdy niche, but now it's becoming mainstream. Many companies have already realized the importance of performance engineering and are willing to pay well for this work.

It is fairly easy to reach performance level 4 in Table @tbl:PlentyOfRoom. In fact, you don't need this book to get there. Write your program in one of the native programming languages, distribute work among multiple threads, pick a good optimizing compiler and you'll get there. Unfortunately, this will only put you halfway to the desired efficiency target.

The methodologies in this book focus on squeezing out the last bit of performance from your application. Such transformations can be attributed along rows 6 and 7 in Table @tbl:PlentyOfRoom. The types of improvements that will be discussed are usually not big and often do not exceed 10%. However, do not underestimate the importance of a 10% speedup. SQLite is commonplace today not because its developers sat one day and decided to make it 50% faster. But because they meticulously made hundreds of 0.1% improvements over the years. The cumulative effect of these small improvements is what makes the difference.

The impact of small improvements is very relevant for large distributed applications running in the cloud. According to [@HennessyGoogleIO], in the year 2018, Google spent roughly the same amount of money on actual computing servers that run the cloud as it spent on power and cooling infrastructure. Energy efficiency is a very important problem, which can be improved by optimizing software.

>  "At such [Google] scale, understanding performance characteristics becomes critical – even small improvements in performance or utilization can translate into immense cost savings." [@GoogleProfiling]

[^3]: From the late 1990s to the late 2000s where personal computers where dominating the market of computing devices.
[^4]: In 2024, Meta uses mostly on-premise cloud, while Netflix uses AWS public cloud.
[^5]: Worldwide spending on cloud services in 2020 - [https://www.srgresearch.com/articles/2020-the-year-that-cloud-service-revenues-finally-dwarfed-enterprise-spending-on-data-centers](https://www.srgresearch.com/articles/2020-the-year-that-cloud-service-revenues-finally-dwarfed-enterprise-spending-on-data-centers)
[^6]: Worldwide spending on cloud services in 2024 - [https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2024-05-20-gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloud-end-user-spending-to-surpass-675-billion-in-2024](https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2024-05-20-gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloud-end-user-spending-to-surpass-675-billion-in-2024)