## Questions and Exercises {.unlisted .unnumbered}

1. What is the difference between CPU core clock and reference clock?
2. What is the difference between retired and executed instruction?
3. When you increase the frequency, does IPC goes up, down, or stays the same?
4. Take a look at the `DRAM BW Use` formula in the table {@tbl:perf_metrics}. Why do you think there is a constant `64`?
5. Measure bandwidth and latency of the cache hierarchy and memory on the machine you use for development/benchmarking using MLC, stream or other tools.
6. Run the application that you're working with on a daily basis. Collect performance metrics. Does anything surprises you?

**Capacity Planning Exercize.** Imagine you are the owner of four applications we benchmarked in the case study. The management of your company has asked you to build a small computing farm for each of those applications with the primary goal to maximize performance (throughput). A spending budget you were given is tight but enough to buy 1 mid-level server system (Mac Studio, Supermicro/Dell/HPE server rack, etc.) or 1 high-end desktop (with overclocked CPU, liquid cooling, top GPU, fast DRAM) to run each workload, so 4 machines in total. Those could be all four different systems. Also, you can use the money to buy 3-4 low-end systems, the choise is yours. The management wants to keep it under $10'000 per application, but they are flexible (10-20%) if you can justify the expense. Assume that Stockfish remains single-threaded. Look at the performance characteristics for the four applications once again and write down which computer parts (CPU, memory, discrete GPU if needed) you would buy for each of those workloads. Which specification parameters you will prioritize? Where you'll go with the most expensive part and where you can save money? Try to describe it in as much details as possible, search the web for exact components and their prices. Account for all the components of the system: motherboard, disk drive, cooling solution, power delivery unit, case/tower, etc. What additional performance experiments you would run to guide your decision?